DEP 0019 - Technical governance for the Django project (#107)
django/deps: final/0018-technical-governance-6x.rst

  security issue in Django being handled under `Django's security
  process <https://www.djangoproject.com/security/>`_.

Specification
=============

How Django is developed
-----------------------

Everyone is encouraged to open tickets, triage tickets and perform code
reviews.

Commits can only be merged in by the `Mergers Team`_. A Merger can merge
their own commits if it's been reviewed by another Merger, the
`Triage & Review Team`_ or `Security Team`_. Members of the
`Releasers Team`_ can also merge commits when they are related to
releases.

A Minor Change that fails to reach consensus can be escalated to the
Steering Council for a final decision to merge.

How Django's technical direction is determined
----------------------------------------------

Everyone is encouraged to propose and provide feedback on new features
for Django at any time on the `new-features GitHub repository`_.

For features which qualify as a Major Change, proposers may be asked to
use `the DEP process`_. Likewise, other changes, for example to processes,
that do not fit the new features description may be presented as DEPs

If discussion of a Minor Change has failed to produce consensus, a

> member may ask the Steering Council to make a decision.

Reviewer: "a member" of what? or should this be "a paticipant in the discussion" or "anyone"?

Author: Yes, that's how I interpret this. Any community member can call for help unsticking a lack of consensus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If discussion of a Minor Change has failed to produce consensus, anyone
may ask the Steering Council to make a decision.
```

> Rejected discussions and features are eligible to be revisited at the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rejected suggestions and features are eligible to be revisited at the
```

Django projects at a fundamental level, and to help shepherd the
project's future direction.

While the Council should not define this direction entirely by itself,
it should be the catalyst within the community for doing so - as such,
it is expected for Council members to actively participate in engaging
with the community, canvassing for ideas about big new features or
directions to take the framework, and reporting back to the community
and the DSF Board on these ideas and if the Council believes they
should be followed.

Decision making process of the Steering Council
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

When asked to make a technical decision, the Steering Council should
first discuss this amongst themselves. If there's agreement on a course
of action, a single member will respond on the `Django Forum`_, ticket, or
`new-features GitHub repository`_ on behalf of the Steering Council. It
may optionally include a dissenting opinion if someone wishes to include one.

Steering Council eligibility
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

To be eligible to be on the steering council, a person must do the following:

* Be a DSF Individual member.

> * Shared any of their corporate affiliations.

Reviewer 2: "Have shared"

Reviewer 3: Or "disclosed"

Author: ```suggestion
* Have shared any of their corporate affiliations.
```

* Have three or more Steering Council Qualities.

> * Not be a members of the `DSF Board`_.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Not be a member of the `DSF Board`_.
```

Steering Council Qualities
**************************

Below are several traits a Django contributor may possess that are beneficial
when on the Steering Council. An individual is unlikely to possess all of

> them, but qualified candidates should have more than one. Each trait is

Reviewer: "more than one" or "three or more" (above)?

Author: ```suggestion
them, but qualified candidates should have three or more. Each trait is
```

* Created content or participated in discussions on the topic

Django usage expertise
**********************

We want people who know how Django is used to build real-world applications.
The Steering Council needs to understand the needs of web applications and
experience with actual usage allows that.

Indicators:

* Experience building and maintaining production Django apps over years

* Has a network of people who maintain and build Django applications

Django education expertise
**************************

We want people who consider Django from a developer experience and education
point of view. The Steering Council needs to consider what it's like to learn
Django and how to be more effective with it.

Indicators:

* Content creator about Django

* Has contributed to Django documentation and/or support content

Django maintenance expertise
****************************

We want people who have a strong understanding of Django from the framework's
perspective. The Steering Council needs to be able to weigh technical
decisions appropriately and familiarity with the code supports that.

Indicators:

* Familiar with several areas of the Django codebase

> * Has helped maintain Django or another well-used project for years

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Has helped maintain Django or a well-used project in the Django ecosystem for years
```

   faith.

3. Registration of candidates will close two weeks after it has
   opened. After registration of candidates closes, the DSF Board will
   publish the roster of candidates to the Django Forum and any other
   appropriate venues, and the election will begin. The DSF Board will
   provide a voting form accessible to registered voters.

4. The voting system is selected by the DSF Board. Voting will be by secret
   ballot. Each voter will be presented with a ballot containing the roster
   of candidates, and any relevant materials regarding the candidates, in a
   randomized order.

5. The election will conclude three weeks after it begins. The DSF Board will
   tally the votes and produce a summary. This summary will be ratified by a
   majority vote of the DSF Board, then posted by the DSF Board to the Django
   Forum and any other appropriate venues. The five candidates with the
   highest vote totals will immediately become the new Steering Council.

Removing a single Steering Council member
*****************************************

A member of the Steering Council can be removed in the following
ways:

* They become ineligible due to actions of the Code of Conduct

>   committee of the DSF. If this occurs, the affected person

Author: ```suggestion
  Working Group of the DSF. If this occurs, the affected person
```

  immediately ceases to be a member of the Steering Council. If that
  person's ineligibility ends at a later date, they may become a
  candidate for the Steering Council again in an election occurring
  after that date.

* It is determined that they did not possess the qualifications of a
  member of the Steering Council. This determination must be made
  jointly by the other members of the Steering Council, and the DSF
  Board. A valid determination of ineligibility requires that all
  other members of the Steering Council vote to declare the affected
  person ineligible and that all members of the DSF Board who can
  vote on the issue (the affected person, if a DSF Board member, can
  not vote) vote "yes" on a motion that the person in question is

>   ineligible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  person ineligible and that all members of the DSF Board 
  vote "yes" on a motion that the person in question is
  ineligible.
```
For the qualification to be needed, a person should be able to serve on both DSF Board and Steering Council simultaneously, and this is not the case.

  writing, of the nomination. The DSF Board will check the
  qualifications of the person nominated, and the DSF Board
  will notify the Steering Council of the result. If the DSF
  Board determines the nominated person is not qualified, the
  nomination must be discarded.

* A qualified nominee will fill the vacancy if the Steering Council
  votes to appoint the nominee. As an exception to the Steering
  Council voting process described above, this vote must be completed
  within one-week and it must be unanimous approval.

Removing the entire Steering Council
************************************

Any Django Software Foundation individual member may make a public
statement of no-confidence in the Steering Council by identifying a
material breach of their duties as defined in the technical governance.
Upon seconding by another individual member of the DSF the DSF Board
will evaluate the merits of the statement of no-confidence in their
next meeting.

If the statement is found to be accurate and correct the DSF Board shall
inform the Steering Council of the breach and provide 2 weeks to
rectify said breach. If the Steering Council fails to rectify the

> breach in the time allotted, a new Steering Council election will be

Reviewer: It should probably be specified that the Board arbitrates if the breach was rectified.

Author: ```suggestion
rectify said breach. If the Steering Council fails to rectify the
breach to the Board in the time allotted, a new Steering Council election will be
```

triggered. Current members of the Steering Council may run in the new
election.

Steering Council reports
++++++++++++++++++++++++

The Steering Council should produce reports of its actions and the state
of Django. To facilitate the standing goal of transparency, as appropriate,
and at their discretion the Steering Council may publish additional posts to
help communicate progress.

* The Steering Council's meeting minutes can be found in the
  `steering-council GitHub repository`_.

* The `Django features roadmap`_ for can be found in the
  `new-features GitHub repository`_

Teams
---------------

The Steering Council and `DSF Board`_ delegate certain responsibilities
and powers to various teams. These teams can be created without
changes to the technical governance document.

To see the list of teams and the process of adding new
teams, please see the `django/dsf-working-groups GitHub repository`_.

Interaction of the Steering Council and the Security Team
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

The `Security Team`_ has the following powers:

* To request a Merger merge code to fix a security issue being

>   handled under Django's security process.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* To request a Merger merges code to fix a security issue being
  handled under Django's security process.
```

I'm a bit unsure why _requesting_ a merge is considered a "power"? Anyone can request something? The power would be to approve, merge or demand?

Author: I hear you. I can see why it can feel off.

The security team doesn't have the actual permission to merge or release code. They need the mergers or releasers to do that. Using the language of request rather than demand is a bit more open to allowing leeway in how things go.

If we're running into a situation where teams are nitpicking the language here saying, "you can only request!!!" we're running into major problems. I think it's fair to assume people in our community are going to be collaborative. If people are wielding specific language to shield their behavior repeatedly, that's a CoC concern.

Reviewer 4: I 100% agree with the sentiment about having a collaborative atmosphere without need for strong legal phrases :+1: 

I'll try to put a suggestion in the introduction to the list. That way, these two can remain small grammar nit-picks :blush:

* To request a Releaser issue a release of Django containing code to
  fix a security issue being handled under Django's security

>   process.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* To request a Releaser issues a release of Django containing code to
  fix a security issue being handled under Django's security
  process.
```

Same question for this point, what does "request" really entail here?

    limitation appears to only limit productive functions of the
    Steering Council. If an outgoing Steering Council attempts to
    enact undesirable changes at the end of their term, the DSF Board
    exists as the check. This allows the Steering Council to make
    changes that are productive during this time. A common governance
    change has been to revisit voting requirements. This usually
    becomes relevant right when an election is starting.

* Allowing the Steering Council to revisit rejected discussions at
  their discretion.

  * This prevents one Steering Council from limiting the next
    Steering Council in an undesirable fashion. If a community
    member is asking for discussions to be revisited frequently, to
    the extent of being annoying, that would be a Django Code of
    Conduct Violation.

  * This language was changed from vetoed to rejected to better match
    the decision making process for the Steering Council.

* Not allowing Board members to serve on the Steering Council.

  * This simplifies some of the governance by reducing exception cases.
    Plus, these roles are meant to be time-intensive and it's unlikely

>     for someone to do both well.

Reviewer: What were the exceptions?

Author: Anywhere in DEP 10 where it had to mention something about a person being both a board member and steering council member. For example, the exception case that we missed, but you caught elsewhere in the document: https://github.com/django/deps/pull/107#discussion_r3104920668

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * This simplifies some of the governance by reducing exception cases
    related to serving on both simultaneously.
  * Plus, these roles are meant to be time-intensive and it's unlikely
    for someone to do both well.
```

  specific eligibility prerequisites.

  * The specific eligibility requirements seemed to cause candidates to self-
    select out. By listing the qualities and traits a Steering Council member
    may have, a prospective candidate may feel more qualified to run. It has
    been difficult to quantify what experience will make a good Steering
    Council member. By leaning into the qualitative aspects, this should help
    make it easier to nominate yourself for the Steering Council.

* Allowing the DSF Board greater autonomy in running the Steering Council
  elections.

  * By not including as many requirements of the voting mechanics, the Board
    can integrate lessons learned from the DSF Board elections for the
    Steering Council.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

This document supersedes both DEP 10 and DEP 12.

Reference Implementation
========================

N/A

Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain per the Creative
Commons CC0 1.0 Universal license
(http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/deed).

(All DEPs must include this exact copyright statement.)

> .. _DEP 44: https://github.com/django/deps/blob/main/accepted/0044-clarify-release-process.rst

Reviewer 3: This link didn't work for me.

Author: ```suggestion
.. _DEP 44: https://github.com/django/deps/blob/main/final/0044-clarify-release-process.rst
```

.. _Mergers Team: https://github.com/django/dsf-working-groups/blob/main/active/mergers-team.md

> .. _Releasers Team: https://github.com/django/dsf-working-groups/blob/main/active/releasers-team.md

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
.. _Releasers Team: https://github.com/django/dsf-working-groups/blob/main/active/releasers.md
```
